Hey folks. I hope you're
enjoying this podcast. You know,
I've done over 650 podcasts,
so I must enjoy doing
it. And I hope you
enjoy listening, but if you
enjoy stories about the people
behind the technology you use,
you should also check out
the greater than code podcast.
They focus on the human
side of software development. They've
got stories of inclusivity and
accessibility from the people you
don't normally hear from search
for greater than code in
your favorite podcast app, or
check out greater than code.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today I'm
talking with Karen Catlin book
out called better allies. You
can check it out better.
allies.com. She most recently served
as a vice president in
the office of the CTO
at Adobe systems and has
been in tech for a
while. I am so well,
thank you for having me.
This is so exciting. Hi,
I'm happy to chat with
you. I've actually read one
of your other books was,
was called present techies guide
to public speaking, and I
had your coauthor pour NEMA
via Shanker on the show
in show 501. So people
should check out that show
as well. Yeah, thanks. Yeah.
Present a techies guide to
public speaking is all about
leveling up your skills around
giving presentations or giving talks
externally. I'm super important for
our careers in tech. And
so thanks for the shout
out and I would definitely
encourage your readers to check
it out. Yeah, absolutely. And
now you've got another book
and it's focused not just
on hiring and retaining a
workforce, but keeping them and
making sure that they don't
walk out the door. Exactly.
Yeah. That's what better allies
is all about? It is
about pretty much everyday simple
actions. Anyone can take to
create a more inclusive and
engaging workplace where really anyone
can do their best work
and everyone is just thriving.
And there's a great buzz
about the workplace. So that's
the focus of my second
book. Yes. And as you
mentioned, there's a whole chapter
on hiring and casting as
wide a net as possible
in the hiring process. There's
supposedly a tech shortage out
there. And in researching this,
I went and I Googled
tech storage and I got
an interesting reply. I got
interesting results. The first one
was the tech talent shortage
is a lie. And then
the next one was the
tech talent shortage is even
larger than you thought. So
now I don't know, are
we, are we, do we
not have enough techies? Yeah.
Well, so first of all,
think about your experience at
Microsoft and for your listeners
wherever they are, their experience
hiring. I think that most
people probably think it's pretty
hard to hire tech talent
these days. I'm certainly I'm
in Silicon Valley and there's
such a shortage and it's
hard to hire the right
talent. So just anecdotally I
think that the tech talent
shortage is alive, not a
lie. And, and as I've
done research too, there are
definitely different studies that show
up and catch my eye.
One is last summer, I
was reading something on LinkedIn
and they were reporting that
by 2020, which is only
like a year and a
half away, maybe, you know,
ground up to two years.
But by 2020, there's going
to be over a million
tech jobs that are going
unfilled because the talent isn't
there. And then I've also
known the CSO website for
chief security officers reported that
by 2021, there's going to
be 3.5 million cyber security
jobs that are going unfilled.
Okay. So I think that
there's probably, you know, even
if you think that those
statistics are maybe exaggerated or
not quite accurate, there's still
something there. And we don't
have enough talent to fill
all these tech roles that
we need in our companies
and frankly, to solve problems
around the world that we
know need solving. That's a
great point. And we can
look at it as a
gap in that there aren't
enough people to hire, but
we can also think about
the people who have talent
right now might want to
develop their talent internally and
stay at the company and
move into a different job.
That's, you know, up until
the one direct, you know,
diagonally within their company. Absolutely.
And I certainly hope that
our, our tech companies are
investing in their talent, that
they have, that they want
to keep growing the talent.
I mean, face it, tech
moves so quickly. And if
you rely on the skills
you have last year, they're
not going to be the
skills you need next year.
Right. So I hope that
the companies are investing in
talent, but it probably is
not happening at the right
pace. Definitely. No, it doesn't.
I recently had someone who's
a friend of mine leave,
leave the company. And on
the way out in the
kind of like final email,
she was a black woman
in tech. She said, you
meaning you, the tech industry
are spending so much time
trying to get us to
come work at your company,
that you're not putting any
work into having a stay
at your company. That idea
of not focusing on retention,
but having so many recruiters
running out there looking for,
for talent really hit me.
Yes. Oh my gosh. Retention
is so critical. And you
mentioned she's a woman, is
that, did I hear that?
Right? This friend of hers.
Yeah. Black woman in tech,
a black woman in tech,
even more elusive, I'll call
it because if you look
at the statistics that are
being reported, the demographics that
get reported in various diversity
reports, we definitely see that
there's hardly any people of
color working in tech. And
so I know that that
hiring those people, there's a
lot of focus on bringing
people of color of tech,
as well as people from
other underrepresented groups into our
tech companies. But if we're
not retaining them, what I
mean, how shortsighted is that
and can kind of have
to think about what are
our budgets that we give
to the recruiting team to
hire these talents versus the
budget we're giving to whether
it's learning and development or
other activities to create the
really inclusive environments where people
feel like this is awesome.
And I want to be
here. And by the way,
I want all my friends
to come work here too.
This is such a great
place, right? Are we, are
we making the right investment
there? And I kind of
think not in that one
story, you shared underscores that,
but it's really why I
wrote my book. I wrote
this book better allies, because
I really do want everyone
to realize there are things
that we can be doing
to create these workplaces, this
culture, where people feel that
I'm, I can thrive here
and I am thriving. I'm
doing amazing work and it's
fun. And you know, it's
just like, it's, it's the
place I want to be.
And I don't want to
leave. And I'll just say,
there are definitely companies out
there that have that reputation,
but I think they're few
and far between. Hmm. What
do you say to people
who might've made it this
far into the podcast? Or
I've heard stuff like this
before, who are saying, well,
I just want to do
good work like this isn't
about gender. This isn't about
race. Let's just, you know,
the code compiled, that's check
it in. Yeah. So it's
a cool the code compile
and check it in, you
know, that's great, but is
it the right solution? Is
it the right solution for
the customer needs? There's so
many stories about technology gone
wrong there hops because a
diverse group of people we're
not coming up with a
solution they're stories about, do
you want to, well, I'll
share one or two quickly,
like the early airbag technology,
for example, it was built
by a team of all
men who used the standard
heightened weight of an average
adult male to build the
early airbags. And the tragic
story there is that as
those airbags were deployed into
cars and as they deployed
in accidents, they worked really
well for the, the, the
men who are the standard
height and weight. But the
tragedy is they were killing
women and children. Okay. So
you kind of wonder, well,
if there had been some
women involved in that engineering
team coming up with the
first airbags, would the same
solution have been put into
place or would have a
better solution have been pointed
out. You don't, we don't
know, we can't go back
and re redo history, but
that's just one example. Another
example is a more recently
is the Apple health tracker.
You know, when it was
first announced the Apple health
tracker, that was, I think
the marketing was L the
health metrics you ever need
to track are available now
in our health tracker, all
the metrics you need, except
they forgot one. Do you
know which one they forgot?
It's the one that women
have been tracking since the
Dawn of time, our Reaper,
our reproductive calendar, they forgot
to include that. And so
half of the population that
was using the Apple health
tracker could not track the
most fundamental of health metrics.
Now, I don't know what
the demographics were of that
team that was creating the
health tracker. But again, I
kind of wonder, like if
there were more women involved,
wouldn't that be the first
thing they think about in
terms of the health metric?
I don't know. So anyway,
That is really interesting because
there's so much more though,
if you think about what
it means to how wide
is your neck and it
be, I give you two
very, very brief stories. My
boss runs a huge team
at Microsoft and visual studio,
but he happens to be
one of the few, for
whatever reason, people that has
a red, green colorblind. So
inevitably he's the one that
finds the problems with our
colors and icons and, and
UX, and it's ranch, red,
green issues, you know, gray,
gray refactor. Isn't quite as
exciting as red green refactor.
Thank goodness you have, you
have him on board. Yeah.
And then the other one
was I'm on the Apple
health of early, early versions
of Apple health. I was
putting my blood sugar in
with my continuous meter every
five minutes. But the database
didn't think to scale that
far, you couldn't do that.
It was too, it was
too much, too much data.
Yes. Data. Yeah. So diversity
is diversity of thought. Diversity
of background it's it's it's
medical it's veterans it's Yeah.
It's that diversity of experience,
life experiences, as well as
personal needs that all comes
together. I think to create
a truly vibrant product development
team is solving the right
problems. Yeah. Well, what do
you do if you have
a small team? What if
you have four or five
people and you don't want
it to look like the
power Rangers, you know, I've
talked about artificial diversity. We
don't want to make a
team of power Rangers where
there's five people, one of
each type, because a it's
artificial and it's not the
effective team. It's just an
attractive team. Well, or maybe
it is an effective team.
I don't know. It could
very well be the right
team for your needs. We
have the important thing. And
I must admit, I'm not
a fan of quotas per
se, to, to, you know,
we shouldn't have some idealized
power ranger team as you.
I've never heard it talked
about that way, but I
love that. That's not what
I'm all about. I'm about,
if you are building a
team, why not cast the
widest net possible cast a
net that is going to
be broad so that you
get a variety of talent
coming in to the interview
process so that you are
evaluating a variety of candidates
and that you're choosing the
right person for the team
for your needs. Why not
cast the widest net possible?
That makes it good. That's
a good point. So this
isn't about, this is about
getting as many people into
the interview door as possible.
You know, if you're interviewing
three people and it's all,
you know, 50 year old
guys, maybe interview six people,
Right? Exactly. And not just
getting them in the door,
but then interviewing them in
an appropriate way that is
objective, that is not biased.
And when you actually make
them the offer, how can
you do that in an
unbiased way? And how can
you onboard them so that
they feel, Hey, I was
hired because of what I'm
bringing here. And not because
I'm the token, somebody at
the token person of color,
the token woman, they didn't
lower the bar for me
because I've got what it
takes. So it's the whole
process, the whole pipeline of
how we hire and interview
attract candidates interview, and then
hire them. Hmm. Can we,
can we break down some
specifics? For example, I hear
a lot about a white
board interviews and people are
still doing interviews where they
say here, go and sort
this, or do a bubble
sort in, see on a
whiteboard, which is not something
you'd ever do in your
job, but something that we
apparently ask people to an
interview. I know, I know.
And I do think that
it is a much better,
better, better, best practice to
have a realistic interview, to
have an interview that mimics
what, what the life is
going to be like once
they walk in the door.
So if it is the
kind of thing that you
are whiteboard, coding every day,
and you're doing that in
a team, then that's fine
to have that be part
of your interview process. But
chances are, as you said,
it's not, it's just this
artificial thing we've done. Maybe
it's because we were put
through that ringer when we
got our jobs. So we're
going to pass that along
to somebody else. Right. Pay
it forward, maybe it's because
we don't know what else
to do, you know, another,
yeah. Another thing that we,
we do. And I think
it's just because of habit
is leading up to the,
the whole interview process when
we're writing job descriptions. I
mean, how many times have
you written a job description?
I'm sure you've done this
many times, but, and you
kind of copy and paste
the last one. The last
one might say, you know,
open source experience, nice to
have and a bachelor's degree
or equivalent in computer science
and, and, and Dan, right.
We copy and paste. And
it turns out That as
a result, we end up
having a lot of extraneous
requirements in our job listing
extraneous requirements in terms of,
do you really need a
college degree to be a
software engineer? Well, I haven't
have a computer science degree.
I love the training I
got, but the bootcamp grads
or years of experience might
surpass that, or might be
the equivalent. So ask yourself
with every requirement you're putting
in a job listing. Would
I say no to the
best candidate ever who came
through the door if they
didn't have that college degree.
Right. And if the answer
is, you know, I, I
sort of soften that requirement.
I'd waive that requirement, then
why even put it there
in the first place, open
source experience, the same thing.
Yes. There are some jobs
that absolutely require you work
in open source. And so
of course that would be
a valid requirement, but so
many of our engineering jobs
don't really require open source
experience. It's just sort of
a way for us to
vet a candidate, may we
can go check out their
contributions, the code they forked.
Maybe we can go see
what they've done and get
hub, but it really doesn't
tie to the job per
se. So why put it
in there if it's really
not a requirement? And in
fact, in my book, I
talk about why not try
to just have five requirements
for any job that you're
listing really narrow down what
you're asking for and what
you're looking for to five
and five is kind of
an artificial number could be
six or seven. Doesn't really
matter, but, but try to
minimize it. And the reason
to do this is there
are studies. In fact, there's
this famous HP internal study
from years ago that studied
the promotion velocity for women
and men at the company.
And they found that women
applied for a promotion internally
when they had about a
hundred percent of the requirements
for the job they applied
only if they could say
to every single requirement. Yup,
yup, yup. Yup. Yup. All
the way down by contrast
men internally applied for these
promotions when they had that
60%, when they had 60%
of the requirements and they
kind of probably thought in
their head, I've got enough,
I've got more than half.
I could go for this
promotion now. And that study,
it's kind of infamous. It's
an, it was an internal
study. It hasn't been published
externally, but the study has
been repeated by other researchers
and they finding very similar
things that women will apply
for things when they, they
know they can do the
job 100% of the time
they've got all the things
they're looking for and men,
you know, will, will apply
when they've got most of
them. It's so it's, you
don't want to believe these
things. They are true. It's
a, literally yesterday I was
having dinner with my niece.
She's an accountant. She's just
discovered that her job, that
she's underpaid, she's the lowest
paid of the five accountants
that are there. She was
recently looking around at a
job at job listings and
she, she just exactly described
what you described. She was
looking at the list of
things she could do, and
she had check, check what
I can do all of
this. She basically didn't realize
she was as competent as
she was until she found
a job description that described
her job. Exactly. And she
had previously felt like, well,
I'm never going to ask
them for more money because
if I, I would never
be able to find another
job, but then she realized
what a second. I can
do this. I could find
another job. So now she's
going to go and ask
for her, her raise. And
I encouraged her to not
ask as a raise. I
encouraged her to ask it
as a correction Correction. Oh,
good for you. That's great
advice. I love that. And
it's, it's just so interesting.
I love hearing these anecdotal
examples of this in the
wild, so to speak in
real life, because it does
happen and the research backs
it up. So a best
practice then to attract more
women and to cast that
wider net is really simplify
your job descriptions to the
bare minimum, to the things
that you absolutely are going
to be interviewing for. And
that you require for the
job and leave out all
those nice to have. Yeah.
Job descriptions have become so
long. They're almost as longer
than your resume. I've seen
page Mo you know, page
long job descriptions. Someone recently
showed me a job description
that asked for a master's
degree in lieu of experience.
And I thought that was
an interesting and weird way
to do things. They said,
well, we want you to
have five or 10 years
experience or a master's degree.
Not true. Those are interchangeable.
I don't either. I don't
know what they were thinking,
but perhaps they had a
method to their madness there.
Yeah. I don't know. Don't
know. Interesting. Okay. So you
said you need to give
fair interviews. Yes. Can we
talk about that? Yeah, please.
Hey friends, this is Scott,
but this isn't an advertisement.
I just wanted to take
a moment in the middle
of the podcast here to
ask you to help me
grow the show. When you
visit our sponsors, you helped
me out. You helped me
in my spare time, build
this and tell people about
it. But what I really
need from you is that
you tell people about the
show. I love when I
see tweets from you, when
you tweet our guests. When
you talk about the show,
there's anything you can do
to tell your friends, family,
relatives, coworkers, colleagues, about the
show. That'd be great. If
you have an idea for
someone who should be on
the show, let me know.
And above all, review the
show, review it on your
blog, review it on iTunes,
review it on Google play
or Stitcher or wherever you
can because telling people about
the show, lets me continue
to do the show with
over 600 episodes. Thanks a
lot. So quick story about
how things sometimes are not
fair. Well, years and years
ago, early in my career,
I think I had about
six years of experience. At
the time I had been
working as a software engineer
and I actually was married.
My husband, Tim and I
had met at work. And
we had almost identical resumes.
We had gone to the
same school, got the same
computer science degree, worked at
the same company, right out
of school using the same
technologies, the same frameworks like
it, literally our resumes were
almost identical and we decided
we were going to move
to Silicon Valley. We were
living in England at the
time we were moving to
Silicon Valley and we applied
to a few places and
found one company, very large
tech company that was building
out a team and they
were hiring a handful of
software engineers. And we said,
perfect. Let's apply. We've worked
together before. Wouldn't it be
fun to do that again?
So we applied and we
both got interviews on the
same day. We were seated
in side by side conference
rooms. And literally the interview
team talked to me, you
know, one person talked to
me and then for half
an hour and then move
next door and interviewed my
husband. And it went back
and forth like that all
day. It was a pretty
exhausting day at the end
of the day when my
husband and I were driving
back to our hotel room,
we started comparing notes. Like,
how'd you do? How'd you
think it went, you know,
those types of things. And
I remember him telling me
like, Karen, that was the
hardest interview I've ever had.
They asked such tough questions.
I don't know how I
did that type of thing.
And I remember thinking, huh,
that was the easiest interview
I've ever had. They didn't
ask me any tough technical
questions. They were so superficial
his skirted. Mike's just the
level of my experience. And
I realized what happened is
they lowered the bar for
me. They didn't think that
I, as a woman had
the same technical chops as
my husband. And they asked
different questions, even though we
were back to back side
by side. And the interesting
thing is that company ended
up making both of us
offers. And I decided to
say no, because I didn't
want to join a team
that lowered the bar for
me during the interview process,
like, what would it be
like if I actually joined
the team? What, what was,
what would the quality of
work assignment be that I
got, or the I'd get
in a team meeting or
a standup, right? Like I
just didn't think it was
going to be there. So
that's one example of how
the hiring process, the interview
process itself can be very
biased. So the best practice
to contrast that and to
approach it differently is to
make sure we really have
objective criteria that we are
interviewing against perhaps even having
very structured interview tactics, where
there are questions designed upfront,
head of time that you're
going to be asking each
candidate consistently and some rubric
for measuring the answers, measuring
those responses so that the
bias can be taken out
as much as possible. So
that's for example, how, how
the bias creeps into the
high, the interview process. I
think, I think that last
bit we should kind of
double click on a minute
because I think that's really,
really functionally practical advice that
someone who's listening can use,
like right away, write down
some questions, talk about them
as a group, decide that,
yeah, we'll have an interview.
We can, the interview can
go in wide reaching different
directions, but these are the
15 questions that we are
going to ask everyone. They
are good, solid tech questions.
They're unbiased. They're not trivia,
they're not writing a bubble
sword on a whiteboard. They
are representative of the kind
of stuff that this person's
going to do every day.
Right. They aren't your, your
favorite movie. They aren't, you
know, like whatever. I mean,
w w you know, it's
just, it's focused on the
business and the business needs.
Yeah. Yeah, definitely. You know,
what else I would, I
would love your listeners to
ask if they is, add
a question. So number 16,
to that list of 15,
ask the question, how have
you contributed to a diverse
and inclusive workplace? Just ask
that question. Some people would
just stared into the middle
distance and didn't have an
answer to that Then, you
know, you know, and you
can decide if this is
important to you, but if
it's an important, if it's
important for you to be
hiring people who are going
to add to the inclusivity
of the environment, even if
they are part of the
majority now, as you know,
a white man, if you're
looking for people who are
going to make your workplace
even more inclusive, why not
start when they're walking through
the door and ask that
question, if you don't care,
don't ask it. But if
they stare into the distance
and that's going to be
very telling, Yeah, I think
that one of the things
that helps me as a,
as a white guy think
about things is I really
call out the difference between
diverse, which is a thing
which is maybe the who
and inclusive, which is the,
how, The, how loves that.
We, we, we did a
Thanksgiving meal recently and we
had some people come who
were vegetarian, inclusive behavior was
making sure that they had
vegetarian food to eat. Right.
We weren't trying to put
together, put together a diverse
Thanksgiving, but we wanted to
be an inclusive one. Otherwise
we'd have our guests literally
just eating stuffing. Oh gosh,
we put sausage in our
stuffing. That wouldn't work very
well. Anyway. Yes, I know,
but that's, it that'd be
a problem. There we go.
But what a great, great
thought. I don't know. I
love that. I love that
inclusive is the how and
the diverse is the who.
That's great. So simple. And
so, so telling, yeah, You
have a section on performance
feedback, and this has been
a problem amongst, you know,
kind of my, my manager,
friends of people, not feeling
that their performance feedback was,
was fair, getting feedback, and
then talking to a peer
and then finding out that
they were given entirely different
feedback, even though they were
doing the same jobs. How
do you keep feedback private
while still making it fair
to everyone? Yeah. I don't
know if that is the
concern that I have in
terms of private feedback. It's
more that there's research showing
that we tend not to
give difficult feedback, constructive feedback,
you know, the feedback that
helps us really learn and
grow. We tend not to
give that difficult feedback to
people who are different than
us, whether that is across
gender lines or race lines
or some other demographic line,
we hold ourselves back. Here's,
here's why, you know, as
a person who's white, I
am white. I might not
want to give that really
tough feedback to a person
of color on my staff
because I might think, Oh
my gosh, they're going to
think I'm racist. If I
give them, if I show
up real tough here, and
I'm giving them these, this
feedback, they're going to think
I'm racist for a man.
He might not give feedback
to a woman because he
might think she's going to
think I'm sexist if I
give her this feedback. So
it's just easier to hold
back. And there's research that,
that shores this up and
improves it out Stanford's claim
and instituted a research study
of reviewing thousands and thousands
of written annual performance reviews
from tech companies. And this
is what they ended up
finding is that the difficult
feedback went more to men
than women. Women just didn't
get as much cause again,
because chances are their bosses.
Amanda, that's how it works
in tech. The other thing
they found is that the
length of the performance reviews
was different. Men got longer,
just longer more words in
their performance reviews. So there
was more, more feedback given.
And also the third thing
is that men were cha
chancellor and men were more
likely to get feedback about
a skill they needed to
learn that would further their
career tech skill in particular.
So the feedback we're giving,
I think that's where the
equitable part is. This let's
make sure that we are
writing performance reviews of the
same length that we are
for every review we're giving.
We're making sure that we're
giving tangible ideas of tools,
techniques, jobs, skills, that people
should be learning to further
their career. And that when
we do have difficult feedback,
we're not holding it back
Truly significant. And I think
that there are very likely
people who are listening, who
disagree with aspects of this,
and they should kind of
go back to the science
and go back to the,
the work that has been
done in this space. That
is fact-based and say, listen,
the facts are that these
are how people are. You
know, people feel this way.
People are perceived this way.
People are receiving reviews of
this such and such a
length. And if you go
back to the original thing
you said about interviewing, have
specific questions that represent what
they're going to be doing
on the job, you can
apply that to performance feedback.
Are you giving them feedback
on what their job is?
Exactly. You'd like it's objective
criteria. It's a way of
measuring people objectively to help
prevent the bias from creeping.
And we all have bias.
It's okay. But we can
put these best practices in
place to help prevent that
bias from affecting creating an
inclusive workplace from effecting people's
careers. So the book is
coming next month. I think
January, 2019. Yeah, that's right. That's
right. I hope at the
beginning of the month, but
cross let's cross our fingers.
There are few things still
to be worked out, but
we are on track for
January 20, 19. Yeah. Super
excited to get it out
there. And if I, if
you don't mind, I'll give
myself a shout out. People
can go to better allies.com
and sign up to be
alerted when the book is
ready, read more about it.
I also have a newsletter
that's weekly called five ally
actions where I share five
simple everyday things people can
do in a workplace to
create a more inclusive culture.
So just we'll dose of
inspiration every Friday. So you
can sign up for that
newsletter also in my, on
my website, better allies.com. And
then I want to give
you a shout out and
say, go to better allies.com/about
in your bio. There's a
bunch of great URLs that
people should follow. There's of
course, the link to your
newsletter that you commented on.
There's your Twitter handle, better
allies, but also your Ted
X talk on women in
tech, the missing force, this
idea that we've got 50%
of the population just there
waiting to be hired, let's
get them involved. There's a
group of people that we
can, we can call upon.
And then the reminder of
course, that your book with
called a techies guide
to public speaking present. She
was on episode five Oh
one. And that's another great
book that they can buy
from you. Yeah. Thank you
so much. Thanks for all
those shout outs. Really appreciate
it. Yeah. I appreciate you.
Thanks for chatting with me
today. My pleasure. It was
so fun, Scott. Thank you.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week. .